                                             A SAT Solver + Computer Algebra Attack on the
                                                  Minimum Kochen–Specker Problem

                                                            Zhengyu Li1 , Curtis Bright2 , Vijay Ganesh1
                                                   1
                                                       School of Computer Science, Georgia Institute of Technology.
                                                          2
                                                            School of Computer Science, University of Windsor.
arXiv:2306.13319v7 [quant-ph] 9 Apr 2024




                                                  Contributing authors: brian.li@gatech.edu; cbright@uwindsor.ca;
                                                                     vganesh45@gatech.edu;


                                                                                    Abstract
                                               One of the fundamental results in quantum foundations is the Kochen–Specker
                                               (KS) theorem, which states that any theory whose predictions agree with quantum
                                               mechanics must be contextual, i.e., a quantum observation cannot be understood
                                               as revealing a pre-existing value. The theorem hinges on the existence of a
                                               mathematical object called a KS vector system. While many KS vector systems
                                               are known, the problem of finding the minimum KS vector system in three
                                               dimensions (3D) has remained stubbornly open for over 55 years.
                                               To address the minimum KS problem, we present a new verifiable proof-producing
                                               method based on a combination of a Boolean satisfiability (SAT) solver and a
                                               computer algebra system (CAS) that uses an isomorph-free orderly generation
                                               technique that is very effective in pruning away large parts of the search space. Our
                                               method shows that a KS system in 3D must contain at least 24 vectors. We show
                                               that our sequential and parallel Cube-and-Conquer (CnC) SAT+CAS methods
                                               are significantly faster than SAT-only, CAS-only, and a prior CAS-based method
                                               of Uijlen and Westerbaan. Further, while our parallel pipeline is somewhat slower
                                               than the parallel CnC version of the recently introduced Satisfiability Modulo
                                               Theories (SMS) method, this is in part due to the overhead of proof generation.
                                               Finally, we provide the first computer-verifiable proof certificate of a lower bound
                                               to the KS problem with a size of 40.3 TiB in order 23.




                                           1 Introduction
                                           Quantum Mechanics (QM) is often described as one of the most successful physical
                                           theories of all time, and yet many questions regarding the very foundations of QM


                                                                                        1
remain unresolved. To address these foundational issues, many interpretations of QM
(i.e., mappings from mathematical formalisms of QM to physical phenomena) have been
proposed. Hidden-variable theories are attempts at understanding counterintuitive
QM phenomena through a deterministic lens by positing the existence of (possibly)
unobservable physical entities or hidden variables [1] that standard QM theory does
not account for (and hence is deemed incomplete). Over the years, many constraints
have been imposed on hidden-variable theories, e.g., Bell’s inequalities that rule out
the possibility of local hidden-variable theories that are also in agreement with the
predictions of QM [2]. In a similar vein, Simon Kochen and Ernst Specker [3] proved
their famous Kochen–Specker (KS) theorem in 1967 (and independently by John Bell
in 1966 [4]) that essentially asserts that non-contextual hidden variable theories cannot
reproduce the empirical predictions of QM.
     The KS theorem rules out non-contextual hidden-variable theories via the existence
of a finite set of three-dimensional vectors, referred to as a KS vector system [3]. A
KS vector system (or simply a KS system) is a combinatorial object that witnesses a
contradiction between non-contextuality (i.e., the assumption that observables can be
assigned values prior to measurement and independent of measurement context) and
the SPIN axiom of QM. The first KS vector system, discovered in 1967, contains 117
vectors [3]. Another theorem that relies on the existence of KS systems in an essential
way is the “Free Will” theorem of John Conway and Simon Kochen [5].
     Since the publication of Kochen and Specker’s theorem in 1967, physicists and
mathematicians have wondered about the cardinality of the smallest-sized KS vector
system (see Table 2 and Section 3). Finding the minimum KS system, referred to as the
minimum KS problem, is not only of scientific and historical interest but also has direct
applications in quantum information processing [6]. For example, finding a minimum
KS system could enable applications in the security of quantum cryptographic protocols
based on complementarity [7], zero-error classical communication [8], and dimension
witnessing [9]. Further, the large size of all known KS systems has hindered physicists
from using them for empirical tests of the KS theorem, similar to the empirical tests
of Bell’s theorem [10].

1.1 Two definitions of the Kochen-Specker System
There are two definitions of the KS system widely used in literature. The “original”
KS set definition used in this paper (Section 2) contains only the vectors necessary
to prove the KS theorem mathematically. This “original” definition of a KS set is
the one originally used by Kochen and Specker themselves. KS systems developed
by this definition are commonly referred to as “original KS systems” [11]. However,
from an experimental perspective, another definition that requires additional vectors
in the KS system is used, since constructing the set in practice would involve vectors
not explicitly needed in the mathematical proof. Specifically, this definition requires
that every pair of vectors in a 3-dimensional KS set belongs to a set of 3 mutually
orthogonal vectors. KS systems developed by this alternative definition are commonly
referred to as “extended KS systems” [11].
    Both definitions are well-known and used extensively in the literature. For examples,
the ‘original’ definition used in this paper is also used in [12], [13], [14], [15], [5], [16],


                                              2
                  Discoverers             Original System   Extended System
                  Kochen, Specker [3]     117               192
                  Schütte [15]           33                49
                  Peres [26]              33                57
                  Conway, Kochen [14]     31                51
Table 1: Size of 3-dimensional KS systems and how they differ based on the definition
used, as discussed in Subsection 1.1. In addition, Pavičić and Megill [27] discovered
many other unique 3-dimensional extended KS systems with 51, 53, 54, 55, 57, 69, etc.
vectors through automated generation.


[17], [18], [19], while the other definition is used in [11], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25].
As a result of the difference in the two definitions, the lower bound on the original KS
system and the extended KS system are also different, as shown in Table 1.
    John Conway has stressed the problem of finding the minimum number of three-
dimensional vectors necessary to prove the “Free Will theorem” in public lectures on
the topic (see [17]). Thus, knowing the smallest ‘original’ KS set is of interest since such
a set would correspond to a proof of the Free Will theorem using the fewest number of
three-dimensional directions. This in a certain sense would lead to the ‘simplest’ proof
of the theorem. We believe the question of the minimal size of an ‘original’ KS set is
theoretically interesting (independent of what the minimal size of an ‘experimental’
KS set is). In this paper, we investigate the lower bound of the original KS system.
However, the paradigm proposed in this paper is easily adaptable and scalable, and
the approach can be applied to both definitions given the appropriate SAT encoding
of the problem.

1.2 The SAT+CAS Paradigm for Hard Combinatorial Problems
In recent years we have witnessed the dramatic impact of satisfiability (SAT) solvers—
computer programs that take as input Boolean logic formulas and decide whether they
have solutions—in areas as diverse as AI, software engineering, program verification,
program synthesis, and computer security [28, 29]. Unfortunately, despite these fantastic
achievements of SAT solvers, they struggle with certain problems such as those
containing many symmetries [30] or those requiring the usage of more advanced
mathematical theories than propositional logic [31]. Much work has been done to
remedy these drawbacks, including the development of sophisticated symmetry breaking
techniques [32] and the development of solvers that support richer logic such as “SAT
modulo theories” or SMT solvers [33]. However, the mathematical support of SMT
solvers is quite limited when compared with the vast mathematical functionality
available in a modern computer algebra system (CAS).
    In response to this need for a solver that combines the efficient search capabilities
of SAT solvers with the mathematical knowledge available in CASs, a new kind of
solving methodology was developed in 2015 by Zulkoski, Ganesh, and Czarnecki [34]
and independently by Ábrahám [35]. This SAT+CAS solving methodology has been
successfully applied to many diverse problems, including circuit verification [36, 37],
automatic debugging [38], finding circuits for matrix multiplication [39], computing
directed Ramsey numbers [40], and verifying mathematical conjectures [41]. For other


                                               3
                     Discoverers                       Year   Bound
                     Kochen, Specker [3]               1967   ≤ 117
                     Jost [43]                         1976   ≤ 109
                     Conway, Kochen [14]               1990   ≤ 31
                     Arends, Ouaknine, Wampler [17]    2009   ≥ 18
                     Uijlen, Westerbaan [18]           2016   ≥ 22
                     Li, Bright, Ganesh [44]           2022   ≥ 23
                     Li, Bright, Ganesh [45] /
                                                       2023   ≥ 24
                     Kirchweger, Peitl, Szeider [19]
Table 2: A chronology of the bounds on the size of the minimum KS vector system in
three dimensions. This table should not be regarded as a comprehensive catalog of
all three-dimensional KS systems (Section 3); rather, it is a chronological overview
highlighting the advancements in reducing the size of the minimal 3-D KS system in
line with its initial definition. The present work (presented at CanaDAM 2023) was
performed independently of Kirchweger, Peitl, Szeider (presented at IJCAI 2023).


work in the intersection of symbolic computation and satisfiability checking, see
Matthew England’s summary [42] of the SC-Square project. In short, the SAT+CAS
methodology has found wide application in diverse fields that somehow require solving
hard combinatorial problems.
    In this paper, we use the SAT+CAS solving methodology (see Figure 1) to dra-
matically improve the performance of the search for KS systems compared to all
previous approaches developed to prove lower bounds for the minimum KS problem
(see Section 1.4). This is made possible via a combination of the powerful search and
learning algorithms used in modern SAT solvers with an “isomorph-free exhaustive
generation” approach that prevents the duplicate exploration of isomorphic parts of
the search space by the solver. For example, such an approach was recently used to
resolve the Lam’s problem from projective geometry [46]. Although isomorph-free
exhaustive generation has been used extensively in combinatorial enumeration, it has
only recently been combined with SAT solving [47, 48].
    The traditional approach to preventing a SAT solver from repeatedly exploring
isomorphic parts of a search space is via the use of symmetry breaking techniques [30].
One such symmetry breaking approach is to add “static” constraints to the input
formula at the beginning of the search aimed at reducing the size of the search
space [49, 50]. Unfortunately, such an approach can be quite expensive in the sense
that the number of added constraints can be large (e.g., exponential in the number
of variables of the formula that encodes the problem-at-hand). Another approach
is to “dynamically” break symmetries during the solver’s search [30, 51] such as in
the SAT modulo symmetries (SMS) paradigm [52, 53]. Our approach is similar in
that it also dynamically adds constraints to the problem during the solving process.
However, an important difference is that the SAT+CAS paradigm is more general since
it goes beyond breaking symmetries. For example, in the resolution of the smallest
counterexample of the Williamson conjecture, we used the Discrete Fourier Transform
(DFT) as part of the CAS computations [54].




                                            4
                                                        Simplifier

                     CNF                        CaDiCaLCaDiCaL
                                                       +       Simplified
                   Instance                       CASPreprocessorInstance



              KS Vector System                  Orderly Generation
                                                  via SAT+CAS

                                                                 Blocking
                  Embeddability                     CAS
                                                                 Clause
                    Checker

            Z3 SMT           KS                     Partial
                                                   Solution          MapleSAT
             Solver       Candidates




Fig. 1: A flowchart of our SAT+CAS based tool MathCheck for solving the KS
problem in the sequential setting. The CNF instance encoding the KS problem (see
Section 4) is simplified using CaDiCaL+CAS. The simplified instance is passed to the
MapleSAT+CAS tool (see Section 5) either sequentially or in parallel using Cube-
and-Conquer (CnC). Finally, an embeddability checker applies the SMT solver Z3 to
determine whether the candidates are embeddable (see Section 6).


1.3 Automated Verification of Results
Verification is of utmost importance in the context of computer-assisted proofs, given
the mathematical nature of such computations—especially for nonexistence proofs.
Fortunately, the SAT+CAS paradigm naturally lends itself to automated verification,
given the fact that all modern SAT solvers produce verifiable proofs. By contrast, all
previous computer-assisted proofs of lower bounds for the minimum KS problem are
not verifiable.
    Since our problem requires the solver to perform an exhaustive search, the validity of
our nonexistence result is crucially dependent on the encodings and the computational
tools that we use. For example, our nonexistence result crucially relies on the correctness
of the SAT solver’s search and the computer algebra system’s isomorph-free exhaustive
generation routine. Fortunately, our SAT+CAS method generates verifiable certificates
that allow an independent third party to certify that the SAT solver’s search is
exhaustive and also that the facts provided by the isomorph-free generation are correct.
Thus, one does not need to trust either the SAT solver or the CAS to trust that our
results are correct—instead, one only needs to trust the correctness of the proof verifier.
This is quite significant, as SAT solvers and CASs are complicated pieces of software
that typically cannot be guaranteed to be bug-free. By contrast, a proof verifier is a



                                            5
much simpler piece of software that can be formally checked. In Section 9, we provide
details on the verification techniques that we used to certify our results.

1.4 Our Contributions
 • Proof-producing SAT+CAS with Orderly Generation (OG) Method:
   In this paper, we present the design and implementation of a verifiable proof-
   producing SAT+CAS system with orderly generation (OG) aimed at combinatorial
   problems (as part of the SAT+CAS tool, MathCheck1 ), thus showing that the
   minimum KS system must contain at least 24 vectors. Also, we extend our work
   to complex vectors in three dimensions (3D), and thus establish a lower bound of
   24 for both the real and complex KS problem.
 • Speedup over Competing Methods: We show that our sequential and parallel
   Cube-and-Conquer (CnC) SAT+CAS methods are significantly faster than SAT-
   only, CAS-only, and prior CAS-based methods by [18]. Further, while our pipeline
   is somewhat slower than the recently introduced SMS method, this is in part due
   to the generation of verifiable proofs by our methods which added some additional
   complexity and slowed down our method.
 • Formal Verification of Results: Finally, our approach provides a formal
   verification of the lower bound of 24 for the minimum KS problem in 3D by
   verifying all certificates computed by the SAT+CAS solvers in all orders up to and
   including order 23 (see Section 9). By contrast, [19] describe a method to verify
   their result, but they only report having verified 5% of the proofs in order 23.

2 Background
In this section, we introduce several fundamental concepts from quantum foundations
such as the SPIN axiom, 010-colorability, the KS theorem, and the KS vector system.
For a deeper dive, we refer the reader to the QM section in the Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy [1]. We assume that the reader is familiar with Boolean logic and SAT
solvers. While we provide a very brief overview of cube-and-conquer SAT solvers, we
refer the reader to the Handbook of Satisfiability [28] for a comprehensive overview.

2.1 The KS Theorem
Informally, the KS theorem states that there is a contradiction between the SPIN axiom
of standard QM and the assumption of non-contextuality. The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy provides a comprehensive background to the KS theorem and stresses
its importance in the foundations of QM [1]. The proof of the KS theorem crucially
relies on the existence of a KS vector system (see Figure 2). More precisely, exhibiting
the existence of a KS vector system proves the KS theorem, which essentially states
that the unit sphere is not 010-colorable (defined below).
Spin of an Elementary Particle: Spin is an intrinsic form of angular momentum of
elementary particles whose existence can be inferred from the Stern–Gerlach experi-
ment [55]. In our context, a spin-1 particle is shot through a magnetic field in a given

 1
     Code at https://github.com/BrianLi009/MathCheck



                                                6
                                                                                                                        2.0

                                                                                                                        1.5

                                                                                                                        1.0
                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                              Z
                                                                                                                    0.0
                                                                                                                   −0.5
                                                                                                                   −1.0
                                                                                                                   −1.5
                                                                                                                   −2.0
                                                                                                                  2.0
                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                      1.0
                                                                                                0.5
                     −2.0
                            −1.5                                                            0.0
                                   −1.0                                                         Y
                                          −0.5                                          −0.5
                                                  0.0                                −1.0
                                                 X      0.5
                                                              1.0                −1.5
                                                                    1.5
                                                                          2.0 −2.0




Fig. 2: The 31 vectors of the smallest known KS system in three dimensions (discovered
by John Conway and Simon Kochen circa 1990). For simplicity, the vectors have been
scaled to lie on the cube with vertices (±2, ±2, ±2) instead of the unit sphere.


direction and continues undisturbed, deflects up, or deflects down—corresponding to
3 possible angular momentum states, namely 0, 1, and −1. Thus, the square of this
measurement is 0 or 1.
SPIN axiom: The SPIN axiom of QM states that the squared spin components of a
spin-1 particle are 1, 0, 1 in three pairwise orthogonal directions of measurement. Thus,
the observable corresponding to the question “is the squared spin 0?” measured in three
mutually orthogonal direction always produces yes in exactly one direction and no in
the other two orthogonal directions. We use the dual of the above form in the present
work, i.e., the ‘010’ convention rather than ‘101’, following Uijlen and Westerbaan. The
SPIN axiom follows from the postulates of QM and is experimentally verifiable [56].
KS Vector System: A KS vector system can be represented in multiple ways and we
describe it as a finite set of points on a sphere. As a consequence of the SPIN axiom,
the squared-spin measurements along opposite directions must yield the same outcome.
Therefore, two collinear vectors are considered to be equivalent. To define a KS vector
system, we first formally define a vector system and the notion of 010-colorability. For



                                                               7
the purposes of this paper, we limit ourselves to the 3D version of the KS problem as
the size of the minimum KS system in higher dimensions is already known [57].
Definition 1 (Vector System). A vector system is a finite set of non-collinear
points on the unit sphere in R3 .
     A {0, 1}-coloring of a vector system is an assignment of 0 and 1 to each vector in
the system. The colorings of interest to us are described in the following definition.
Definition 2 (010-Colorability of Vector Systems). A vector system is 010-
colorable if there exists an assignment of 0 and 1 to each point such that:
  1. No two orthogonal points are assigned 1.
  2. Three mutually orthogonal points are not all assigned 0.
Definition 3 (KS Vector System). A KS vector system is one that is not
010-colorable.
Definition 4 (Orthogonality Graph). For a vector system K, define its orthog-
onality graph GK = (V, E), where V = K, E = { (v1 , v2 ) : v1 , v2 ∈ K and v1 · v2 =
0 }.
     Essentially, the vertices of GK are the vectors in K, and there is an edge between two
vertices exactly when their corresponding vectors are orthogonal. Similarly, the notion
of 010-colorability can be translated from a vector system to an orthogonality graph.
Definition 5 (010-colorability of Graphs). A graph G is 010-colorable if there
is a {0, 1}-coloring of the vertices such that the following conditions are satisfied
simultaneously:
  1. No two adjacent vertices are colored 1.
  2. For each triangle, the vertices are not all colored 0.
     It is not always the case that an arbitrary graph has a corresponding vector system,
but if one does exist then we say that such a graph is embeddable.
Definition 6 (Embeddable Graph). A graph G = (V, E) is embeddable if it is a
subgraph of an orthogonality graph for some vector system.
     Being embeddable implies the existence of a vector system K whose vectors have
a one-to-one correspondence with the vertices of G, such that adjacent vertices are
assigned to orthogonal vectors. An example of an unembeddable graph is the cyclic
graph C4 on 4 vertices, as the orthogonality constraints force a pair of opposite vertices
to be mapped to collinear vectors (which are not allowed in this context).
Definition 7 (KS Graph). An embeddable and non-010-colorable graph is called a
KS graph.
Observation 1. There exists a KS vector system if and only if there exists a KS graph.
Definition 8 (KS Candidates). A KS Candidate is a satisfying assignment
generated by the SAT+CAS solver.
     If a KS candidate is also embeddable, then it is a KS graph. As described in Section 6,
our solver dynamically blocks all minimal unembeddable subgraphs up to order 12, and
hence our KS candidates are graphs that do not contain any unembeddable subgraphs
of order up to 12.




                                             8
2.2 The Minimum KS Problem
The minimum KS problem is to find a KS vector system of minimum cardinality,
that is, a system with the fewest number of vectors in three-dimensional space (or
equivalently a KS graph with the fewest number of vertices). Every KS system has an
associated KS graph, so if a KS graph with cardinality n does not exist then a lower
bound on the minimum KS problem is at least n + 1.

2.3 Cube-and-conquer
The cube-and-conquer SAT solving paradigm was developed in [58] to solve hard
combinatorial problems. The method applies two (possibly) different types of SAT
solvers in two stages: First, a “cubing solver” splits a SAT instance into a large number
of distinct subproblems specified by cubes—formulas of the form x1 ∧ · · · ∧ xn where xi
are literals. Second, a “conquering solver” solves each subproblem under the assumption
that its associated cube is true (more precisely, the conjunction of the original instance
and the cube).
    The cube-and-conquer method has empirically been shown to be effective at
quickly solving large satisfiability problems when the cubing solver generates many
cubes encoding subproblems of similar difficulty. It has since been applied to solve
huge combinatorial problems such as the Boolean Pythagorean triples problem [59],
the computation of Schur number five [60], and a SAT-based resolution of Lam’s
problem [46].

3 Previous Work
Over the last 55+ years, many mathematicians and physicists such as Roger Penrose,
Asher Peres, and John Conway have attempted to find a minimum 3-dimensional KS
system (see Table 2). The first KS system was constructed in 1967 and it contained 117
vectors [3]. A KS system with 109 vectors was found by Res Jost [43] in 1976. Peres
found a KS system of size 33 in 1991, and Schütte found a KS system of size 33 in
1996. The current smallest known KS system in three dimensions contains 31 vectors
and was discovered by John Conway and Simon Kochen circa 1990 (see Figure 2).
All these discoveries were made analytically, without the assistance of computational
methods. Recently, Pavičić and Megill [27] applied an automated generation approach
to robustly generate KS systems in odd dimensions. This approach led to the discovery
of many more three-dimensional KS systems.
    In 2011, Arends, Ouaknine, and Wampler proved several interesting properties of
KS graphs and leveraged them to computationally establish that a KS system must
contain at least 18 vectors [17]. Seven years later, Uijlen and Westerbaan showed
that a KS system must have at least 22 vectors [18]. This computational effort used
around 300 CPU cores for three months and relied on the nauty software package [61]
to exhaustively search for KS graphs. Pavičić, Merlet, McKay, and Megill [57] have
improved a variation of the KS problem, one in which each vector is part of a mutually
orthogonal triple (or a mutually orthogonal d-tuple in d dimensions). Under this
restriction, they show a KS system must have at least 30 vectors in d = 3 dimensions,


                                            9
and in d ≥ 4 dimensions the minimum KS system has 18 vectors. However, in three
dimensions the gap between the lower and upper bounds of a KS system remains
significant and the minimum size remains unknown.
    Another way of measuring the size of a d-dimensional KS system is the number of
mutually orthogonal “contexts” (cliques of size d in the orthogonality graph). Lisoněk,
Badzia̧g, Portillo, and Cabello [62] found a six-dimensional KS system with seven
contexts and showed this is the simplest possible KS system allowing a symmetry
parity proof of the KS theorem. This KS system was later experimentally used by
Cañas et al. [6] to perform measurements verified to arise from a quantum system
rather than a classical system.
    Preliminary versions of the present work were announced at the 2022 SC-Square
workshop, as well as at the 2023 Southeastern International Conference on Combi-
natorics, Graph Theory and Computing, and at CanaDAM 2023. At the former two
venues, we presented searches for KS systems with up to 22 vectors, and at CanaDAM
2023 we presented our work that extends this to a search for KS systems with up to
23 vectors. In each case the searches were exhaustive and no KS systems were found.
Thus, a KS system in three dimensions must contain at least 24 vectors.
    Kirchweger, Peitl, and Szeider [19] completed an independent search for KS systems
establishing a lower bound of 24 vectors with a similar approach as SAT+CAS but
with an SMS solver and an alternate definition of canonicity. Also, they do not use OG,
as their definition of canonical does not satisfy property (2) from Sec. 5, but otherwise
the SMS approach is similar in that it combines a SAT solver with a canonical checking
routine. Their approach can also be used to generate proof certificates, though the
certificate verification was not performed with the exception of 5% of the certificates
in the order 23 search. By constrast, ours formally verifies all results.

4 SAT Encoding of the Minimum KS Problem
As stated earlier, every KS vector system K can be converted into a KS graph GK .
Each vector in K is assigned to a vertex in GK , so that if two vectors are orthogonal,
then their corresponding vertices are connected.
    We say a KS graph is minimal if the only subgraph that is also a KS graph is itself.
Arends, Ouaknine, and Wampler [17] proved that a three-dimensional minimal KS
graph must satisfy the following properties:
  1. The graph does not contain the 4-cycle graph C4 as a subgraph.
  2. Each vertex of the graph has a minimum degree 3.
  3. Every vertex is part of a 3-cycle triangle graph C3 .
We encode these three properties and the non-010-colorability of the KS graph in
conjunctive normal form (CNF), as described below. If a SAT solver produces solutions
for such an encoding, then these solutions are equivalent to graphs that satisfy all of
the above-mentioned four constraints.
    A simple undirected graph of order n has n2 potential edges, and we represent each
                                                

edge as a Boolean variable. The edge variable eij is true exactly when the vertices i and
j are connected, where 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n. For convenience, we let both eij and eji denote
the same variable since the graphs we consider are undirected. We also use the n3



                                           10
triangle variables tijk denoting that distinct vertices i, j, and k are mutually connected.
In Boolean logic this is expressed as tijk ↔ (eij ∧ eik ∧ ejk ) which in conjunctive
normal form is expressed via the four clauses ¬tijk ∨ eij , ¬tijk ∨ eik , ¬tijk ∨ ejk , and
¬eij ∨ ¬eik ∨ ¬ejk ∨ tijk . Again, the indices i, j, and k of the variable tijk may be
reordered arbitrarily for notational convenience.

4.1 Encoding the Squarefree Constraint
To encode the property that a KS graph must be squarefree, we construct encodings
that prevent the existence of any squares in the graph. Observe that three squares can
be formed on four vertices. Therefore, for every choice of four vertices i, j, k, l, we use
clauses ¬eij ∨ ¬ejk ∨ ¬ekl ∨ ¬eli , ¬eij ∨ ¬ejl ∨ ¬elk ∨ ¬eki , and ¬eil ∨ ¬elj ∨ ¬ejk ∨ ¬eki
to encode the fact that a solution produced by the solver must be squarefree. By
enumerating all possible choices of four vertices and constructing the above CNF
formula, we force the graph to be squarefree. The total number of clauses used is 3 · n4 .
                                                                                            


4.2 Encoding the Minimum Degree Constraint
For each vertex i, to ensure that i is connected to at least three other vertices, we take
each subset  S of {1, . . . , i − 1, i + 1, . . . , n} with cardinality n − 3 and construct the
clause j∈S eij . By enumerating over all such subsets we enforce a minimum degree
       W
of 3 on vertex i. Thus, constructing similar formulae for all vertices 1 ≤ i ≤ n, enforces
that any vertex in the graph       has a degree       of at least 3. The total number of clauses
used is therefore n · n−1       =       n−1
                                              .
                                           
                       n−3        n  ·   2


4.3 Encoding the Triangle Constraint
We encode the property that every vertex is part of a triangle as follows: for each
vertex i, we require 2 other distinct vertices to form a triangle, and there are n−1      2
possible triangles containing i. At leastWone of those triangles must be present in the KS
graph—this is encoded by the clause j,k∈S tijk where S is {1, . . . , i − 1, i + 1, . . . , n}
and j < k. Using this clause for each 1 ≤ i ≤ n ensures that every vertex is part of a
triangle and hence there are n triangle clauses.

4.4 Encoding the Noncolorability Constraint
Recall that the key property of a KS graph is that it is non-010-colorable. As stated
earlier, a graph is non-010-colorable if and only if for all {0, 1}-colorings of the graph,
a pair of color-1 vertices is connected or a set of three color-0 vertices are mutually
connected.
    For each {0, 1}-coloring, a KS graph has a set V0 of color-0 vertices and a set V1 of
color-1 vertices. Given a specific such coloring, the clause
                                     _                _
                                            eij ∨              tijk
                                   i,j∈V1           i,j,k∈V0
                                     i<j             i<j<k




                                                11
encodes that this coloring is not a 010-coloring of a graph—since either a pair of color-1
vertices is connected or three color-0 vertices are mutually connected. Note that we
have to generate such a clause for all possible colorings, and conjunct them together to
obtain a non-colorability constraint for graphs of order n. An assignment that satisfies
such a constraint corresponds to a graph that is not 010-colorable under any possible
coloring. Observe that in order n the total number of such clauses is 2n .
    Fortunately, an empirical observation allows cutting the size of the formula dra-
matically: {0, 1}-colorings with more than ⌈ n2 ⌉ color-1 vertices are unlikely to be
010-colourings and in practice are not useful in blocking 010-colourable graphs. Put
differently, by dropping the constraints with |V1 | ≥ ⌈ n2 ⌉ we reduce the formula size
drastically (making the formula easier to solve) and the corresponding increase in the
number of satisfying assignments is small enough that these candidates can be ruled
out via post-processing (Section 9). In fact, for graphs up to order 23, no additional
satisfying assignments (or candidate KS graphs) were generated.

4.5 Encoding Static Isomorphism Blocking Clauses
Following [63], we use symmetry breaking constraints that enforce a lexicographical
order among rows of the graph’s adjacency matrix. These small number of additional
constraints enable us to statically block many isomorphic graphs.
       Given an adjacency matrix A of a graph, we define Ai,j as the ith row of A without
columns i and j. Codish et al. prove that up to isomorphism every graph can be
represented by an adjacency matrix A for which Ai,j is lexicographically equal or
smaller than Aj,i for all 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n.
       We express that Ai,j = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ] is lexicographically equal or less than
Aj,i = [y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ] using 3n − 2 clauses and auxiliary variables a1 , . . . , an−1 [64].
The clauses are ¬xk ∨ yk ∨ ¬ak−1 , ¬xk ∨ ak ∨ ¬ak−1 , and yk ∨ ak ∨ ¬ak−1 for k = 1,
. . . , n − 1. The literal ¬a0 is omitted and the clause ¬xn ∨ yn ∨ ¬an−1 is also included.

5 Orderly Generation via SAT+CAS
The symmetry breaking constraints described in Section 4.5 do not block all isomorphic
copies of adjacency matrices. Thus, a crucial part of the MathCheck pipeline is the
use of a SAT+CAS combination of a SAT solver and an isomorph-free generation
routine (the CAS part). The orderly isomorph-free generation approach was developed
independently by Read et al. [65] and Faradvzev et al. [66]. It relies on the notion of a
canonical representation of an adjacency matrix.
Definition 9 (Canonical Graph). An adjacency matrix M of a graph is canonical
if every permutation of the graph’s vertices produces a matrix lexicographically greater
than or equal to M , where the lexicographical order is defined by concatenating the
above-diagonal entries of the columns of the adjacency matrix starting from the left.
    An intermediate matrix of A is a square upper-left submatrix of A. If A is of
order n then its intermediate matrix of order n − 1 is said to be its parent, and A is
said to be a descendant of its intermediate matrices.
    The OG method is based on the following two consequences of Definition 9:
 (1) Every isomorphic class of graphs only has exactly one canonical representative.


                                               12
              Order   Squarefree + Min. Degree 2   Min. Unembed.   Runtime
               4–9                 164                    0          30 s
                10                 563                    2         4.1 m
                11               3,257                    5         1.3 h
                12              23,699                   10          27 h
Table 3: Counts for the number of minimal unembeddable graphs in orders up to 12
and the computation time for the embeddability check.


 (2) If a matrix is canonical, then its parent is also canonical.
    Note that the contrapositive of the second property implies that if a matrix is not
canonical, then all of its descendants are not canonical. The OG process only generates
canonical matrices and they are built starting from the upper-left. Therefore, any
noncanonical intermediate matrix that is encountered during an OG exhaustive search
can be discarded, as none of its descendants will be canonical.
    As described in Figure 1, in our SAT+CAS implementation, when the SAT solver
finds an intermediate matrix the canonicity of this matrix is determined by a canonicity-
checking routine implemented in the MathCheck system. If the matrix is noncanonical,
then a “blocking” clause is learned which removes this matrix (and all of its descendants)
from the search. Otherwise, the matrix may be canonical and the SAT solver proceeds
as normal.
    When a matrix is noncanonical, the canonicity-checking routine also provides
a “witness” of this fact (a permutation of the vertices that produces a lex-smaller
adjacency matrix). We combine this process with the symmetry breaking clauses of
Codish et al. that canonical matrices can be shown to satisfy [63, Def. 8].
    The OG technique provides a speedup that seems to increase exponentially in the
order n of the KS graph—see Table 4, which provides experimental running times
comparing the SAT+CAS approach against SAT-only and CAS-only approaches. These
timings were run on an Intel Xeon E5-2667 CPU and the CAS compared against was
the nauty graph generator [61] with the same configuration from [18]. More details on
our experimental setup can be found in Section 8.
    As described in Figure 1, we simplify the SAT instance using the SAT solver
CaDiCaL [67] before solving the instance using MapleSAT [68].

6 Embeddability Checking
We refer to the solutions generated by the SAT solver as KS candidates. Note that we
have to additionally check whether a KS candidate is embeddable in order to detect
whether it is a KS graph (and hence corresponds to a KS vector system). Hence, we
perform an embeddability check on every KS candidate generated by the SAT+CAS
solver of MathCheck.
    Operationally, a graph G is said to be embeddable if every pair of adjacent G-
vertices can be mapped to two orthogonal vectors on the unit sphere in R3 (refer to
Definition 6). Otherwise, we say that G is unembeddable.
    Our embeddability checking algorithm consists of two parts. The first part is
an integration of the vector assignment algorithm of [18] that finds all possible vec-
tor assignments describing the orthogonal relations between the vectors vi in a KS


                                           13
candidate defined by a set of edges E. A vector assignment is a set of edge pairs
C = {(eij , eik ), (elm , eln ), . . . } ⊆ E 2 where each pair of edges share one common vertex
and each pair is disjoint from each other, meaning the same edge cannot exist in more
than one pair. Each pair (eij , eik ) in C can be interpreted as a cross product relation-
ship between the vectors vi , vj , and vk , since the presence of eij and eik in the KS
graph means that vector vi must be orthogonal to both vj and vk in any embedding
of the candidate.




                    (a)                                               (b)
Fig. 3: The only two minimal nonembeddable graphs of order 10. These are the
smallest squarefree graphs that are not embeddable.


     The second part of the algorithm applies an SMT solver to determine the satisfia-
bility of a system of nonlinear equations generated from a particular vector assignment
as described below. More precisely, an assignment generated by Uijlen and Wester-
baan’s algorithm is converted into a set of cross and dot product equations, and these
equations are passed to the theorem prover Z3 [69] that solves the equations over the
real numbers. We denote the vector corresponding to vertex vi as Vi in Z3, where Vi is
a 3-tuple of real numbers.
     Given a specific vector assignment generated by the previous algorithm, the system
of constraints is as follows:
   1. If (eij , eik ) ∈ C, we add the cross product constraint Vi = Vj × Vk .
   2. If eij is one of the edges of E that is not contained in any of the pairs of C, we
       add the dot product constraint Vi · Vj = 0.
   3. If i ≠ j then Vi must not be collinear with Vj , so we add the noncollinearity
       constraint Vi × Vj ̸= ⃗0.
     A free vector is one that has not been fixed as the cross product of two other
vectors. Of all possible assignments, we first choose the one with the least number of
free vectors, since in practice such an assignment is likely to be solved more quickly.
     It is important to note that for any vector assignment, each edge of the KS graph
is encoded into either constraint 1 or 2, making the encoding shorter and more efficient
than the naive encoding. Constraint 3 requires two vectors to be noncollinear rather
than only being nonequal since we do not enforce vectors to have unit length for


                                              14
reasons of efficiency. This is a harmless optimization since vectors can be projected
onto the unit sphere without disturbing these constraints.
    We also fix two orthogonal vectors to be the standard vectors (1, 0, 0) and (0, 1, 0)
to cut down on the number of free variables. To check whether a graph is embeddable,
we use Z3 to determine whether these nonlinear arithmetic constraints are satisfiable
over the real numbers. Z3 applies a CDCL-style algorithm to decide the satisfiability
of such systems [70]. If a solution is found, it is an assignment of vertices to vectors
that satisfies all orthogonality constraints and the graph is therefore embeddable.
    Embeddability checking of large graphs can be further optimized by precomputing
minimal unembeddable graphs, as defined below.
Definition 10 (Minimal Unembeddable Graph). An unembeddable graph G is
said to be a minimal unembeddable graph if any proper subgraph of G is embeddable.
    A graph is unembeddable if and only if it contains a minimal unembeddable sub-
graph. To optimize embeddability checking, we precomputed all minimal unembeddable
graphs of orders up to and including 12. We only consider squarefree graphs with a
minimum degree of 2 or greater, as the square graph C4 is minimally unembeddable
itself, and a graph containing a vertex of degree 0 or 1 is not minimally unembeddable.
We implement the unembeddable subgraph blocking technique as part of MathCheck.
If a graph contains one of the 17 minimal unembeddable graphs up to order 12 as
a subgraph, the graph is blocked dynamically and is not considered as a satisfying
assignment by MathCheck. This technique leads to a significant reduction of the
number of satisfying assignment (candidates) generated by the SAT+CAS solver.

7 Parallelization
In prior applications of the CnC technique [71, 72], the cubing solver generates a
collection of cubes before the conquering solver is invoked. Subsequently, each of these
subproblems is solved using the conquering solver in parallel. However, this approach
presents two primary challenges. Firstly, the generated cubes might exhibit imbalanced
solving times, especially since the cubing solver does not have the ability to call
the CAS to incorporate isomorph-free generation. Secondly, the proof size for each
subproblem also varies, making it difficult to allocate an appropriate amount of memory
to individual cores. In MathCheck, we implement a slight modification of traditional
CnC practices to resolve the above challenges. In addition, we use a new CnC solver
AlphaMapleSAT [73] that provides significant speedup for the cubing process.
    In our proposed method, the cubing solver of AlphaMapleSAT operates on
a much smaller CNF instance obtained by omitting all non-colorability constraints
(Section 4.4). This approach is substantiated by empirical evidence suggesting that the
same set of cubes can be obtained even without the non-colorability constraints. Alpha-
MapleSAT iteratively generates cubes until the total number of cubes surpasses a
predefined cutoff, which is based on available computational resources. Following cube
generation, each subproblem is processed by the simplifcation solver (CaDiCaL with
OG), and then it is passed to the conquering solver (MapleSAT with OG) and solved
in parallel. To efficiently manage the termination of each subproblem, a termination
strategy is implemented: if the proof size for a subproblem exceeds 7 GiB, the problem



                                           15
               n    SAT+CAS          SMS       CAS-only     SAT-only
               17       0.3 m        0.2 m       25.2 m          9.0 m
               18       1.8 m        1.2 m      455.4 m        266.4 m
               19       9.0 m        8.4 m     9506.4 m     11,705.8 m
               20     140.5 m      100.8 m      timeout        timeout
               21    1945.0 m     1574.4 m      timeout        timeout
Table 4: SAT+CAS vs. SMS, CAS-only (nauty), and SAT-only: The total CPU time
(in minutes) compared on orders 17 ≤ n ≤ 21. All tools are sequential. For higher
orders, CAS-only and SAT-only time out at 12,000 minutes.


                     Number of Cubes              Total CPU time
               n    SAT+CAS     SMS            SAT+CAS      SMS
               22      26,646      18,659          932 h        628.1 h
               23     173,097     313,665       12,116 h     11,921.8 h
Table 5: Parallel CnC SAT+CAS vs. parallel SMS: The number of cubes and total
CPU time for the parallel versions of SAT+CAS and the SAT Modulo Symmetries
tool on orders 22 ≤ n ≤ 23.


is further divided into more cubes and solved accordingly. This iterative process
continues until every subproblem can be resolved with proof sizes under 7 GiB. We
overcome the challenges posed by varying proof sizes by implementing this slight
modification and it allows us to verify all generated proof certificates with at most
4 GiB of memory allocation.

8 Results
8.1 Experimental Setup
Results in Table 4 were conducted on a cluster of Intel E5-2683 v4 Broadwell @ 2.1GHz
CPUs, each with access to 4 GiB of RAM and running 64-bit CentOS Linux 7. Results
in Table 5 were conducted on a cluster of Dual Intel Xeon Gold 6226 CPUs @ 2.7 GHz
(24 cores/node). We used the g++ compiler version 9.3.0 with option -O3 to compile
the SAT solvers used. 24 CPUs were used to solve and verify order 22 (in about 4
days wall clock time), and 240 CPUs were used for order 23 (in about 7 days wall
clock time). To compare MathCheck against other approaches, we computed the
total CPU time used by all processes in the solving process, including simplification,
cubing, SAT solving, CAS queries, and embeddability checking.

8.2 Key Findings
Tables 4 and 5 contain our experimental results. As can be seen from Table 4, the
sequential version of MathCheck outperforms the sequential SAT-only (MapleSAT)


                                         16
                   (a)                                            (b)
Fig. 4: The only two KS candidates up to order 23 that do not contain minimal
nonembeddable graphs up to and including order 14. These two graphs are determined
to be unembeddable by Z3.


and CAS-only (nauty) tools. Further, the sequential MathCheck is comparable to
sequential SMS on orders 17 to 21, even with proof production switched on. (Note
that we are using the results reported by the SMS authors [19] which did not include
generating proofs.)
    The sequential MathCheck also outperforms the parallel tool of [18]. For example,
for order 21, sequential MathCheck takes about 32.4 hours while their tool took 3
months on 300 CPUs in 2014 (the exact kind of CPUs used are not specified). Further,
their tool does not solve orders 22 or greater.
    For higher orders of KS (i.e., 22 and 23), we do not expect the sequential versions of
MathCheck and SMS to scale in a reasonable amount of time, and hence we compare
only their parallel CnC versions (Table 5). The authors of SMS also do not report
on the performance of their sequential version for orders 22 and 23. In comparison
to SMS, our approach was hindered due to our generating and verifying all proof
certificates—requiring us to ensure each proof certificate did not grow too large in order
to permit effective verification. Such an approach requires splitting each cube whose
proof certificate grows too large, and this additional splitting slows down our approach.
    Our method benefits from dynamically blocking minimal unembeddable subgraphs
up to order 12, which enables MathCheck to generate significantly fewer KS candi-
dates compared to [19]. Specifically, we generate a single candidate in order 22 and
41 candidates in order 23, while Kirchweger et al. generates 88,282 and 3,747,950
candidates respectively.
    We compared our KS candidates with Uijlen and Westerbaan’s findings, and verified
their conclusion that there is no KS system with strictly less than 22 vectors. In order
20, we found four additional KS candidates that were not present in the collection of
Uijlen and Westerbaan, indicating that their search missed some KS candidates. We
present one of the missing graphs in Figure 5. We verified that these four additional
graphs satisfy the constraints of a KS candidate and therefore would be KS systems
were they embeddable, but unfortunately, they are not.


                                           17
    Another notable question we address is the existence of a complex KS vector system.
Specifically, is there a KS graph that can be embedded over the complex sphere? We
employ a similar embeddability verification pipeline as mentioned earlier, with the
distinction that vectors now may possess complex number coordinates. We discover
that each KS graph up to order 23 either contains a complex unembeddable subgraph
or is determined to be unembeddable over the complex numbers via Z3. Therefore, we
conclude that the minimum size for both the real and complex KS system are at least
24.




Fig. 5: One of the four graphs with 20 vertices that were not present in Uijlen
and Westerbaan’s enumeration. The four graphs satisfy all constraints mentioned in
Section 4, but are not embeddable, and therefore do not constitute a KS system.




9 Verification of Results
In order to verify the computations produced by MathCheck, we use DRAT proof
logging which is standard in all modern SAT solvers. This makes it possible for a
third-party proof verifier to provide an independent certification of the correctness
of the solver’s conclusion (assuming the input Boolean formula correctly encodes the
minimum KS problem). A DRAT proof consists of a trace of the clauses learned by
the solver during its execution. A proof verifier checks that each clause can be derived
from the previous clauses using simple rules known to be logically consistent. The CAS-
derived noncanonical blocking clauses cannot be verified using the normal rules, so we
specially tag them to be verified separately. Specifically, they are justified via a CAS-
derived permutation that, when applied to the blocked adjacency matrix, produces
a lex-smaller adjacency matrix—and therefore provides a witness that the blocked
matrix is noncanonical and is safe to block. Similarly, the unembeddable subgraph
blocking clauses are justified by a CAS-derived permutation that when applied to the


                                           18
blocked subgraph transforms it into one of the minimal unembeddable subgraphs (see
Section 6).
    The CAS-derived clauses in the DRAT proof are prefixed by the character ‘t’
to signify they should be trusted and we modified DRAT-trim [74] to trust such
clauses following the approach first used in [75]. The trusted CAS-derived clauses are
separately verified by a permutation-applying Python script that applies the witnesses
produced by the CAS to verify the blocked matrices are noncanonical or unembeddable.
Similarly, when a KS candidate is found, the solver learns a trusted clause blocking
the candidate (so that the search continues until all candidates have been found). The
DRAT proof ends with the empty clause, which by definition is not satisfiable. If the
verifier is indeed able to verify the empty clause then we can have confidence that the
SAT solver’s search missed no candidates without needing to trust the solver.
    All results have been certified. The uncompressed proofs for order 22 are about
6.1 TiB in total, and 40.3 TiB for order 23. The certification for orders 22 and 23
required using CnC (as described in Sec. 7) to ensure that each DRAT proof could be
verified with at most 4 GiB of memory.
    All KS candidates produced by our method have been extensively checked. For
example, each KS candidate is passed into a verification script implemented using the
NetworkX [76] graph package to verify that they satisfy all encoded constraints (see
Section 4). Further, we test the embeddability pipeline by performing a verification on
all squarefree graphs of order up to 12 with minimal vertex degree 2. Specifically, if a
graph is embeddable and corresponds to a set of vectors, we check that no pair of vectors
in the set are collinear, and a pair of vectors are orthogonal if their corresponding
vertices are connected.

10 Conclusion
We give a computer-assisted proof showing that a KS vector system in three dimensions
must contain at least 24 vectors. Crucially, our proof is verifiable by an independent
third-party proof checker. In addition, we provide a computational speedup of over four
orders of magnitude over the previously used approach of Uijlen and Westerbaan [18].
For the first time, we successfully implemented and applied the SAT+CAS paradigm
along with orderly isomorph-free generation to provide a robust pipeline for problems
in quantum foundations. The validity of our work is further confirmed by Kirchweger,
Peitl, Szeider [19], who performed an independent search for KS systems with up to
23 vectors with a similar approach as our technical report [77] using a SAT modulo
symmetries (SMS) solver. Compared to previous work, our approach is less error-
prone since we use heavily-tested proof-generating SAT solvers such as MapleSAT and
CaDiCaL. We verified the produced proofs using independent proof checkers, meaning
our result does not rely on the correctness of MapleSAT or CaDiCaL.
    Finding the minimum KS system has remained stubbornly open for over 55 years.
It is not only a problem of great importance to quantum foundations, but has direct
applications to various fields of quantum information processing, such as quantum
cryptographic protocols [7], zero-error classical communication [8], and dimension
witnessing [9]. As a consequence, a wide variety of techniques have been developed to



                                           19
address this question over the past several decades. We add a novel class of techniques
to this body of work.
    The SAT+CAS paradigm has been successfully used to resolve a number of
mathematical problems in combinatorics, number theory, and geometry that had
previously remained unsolved for many decades [39, 41, 46]. With this work, we extend
the reach of the SAT+CAS paradigm, for the first time, to resolving combinatorial
questions in the realm of quantum foundations.

Code Availability
The MathCheck pipeline is open-source and can be accessed at https://github.com/
BrianLi009/MathCheck.

Acknowledgements
This research was enabled in part by support provided by Compute Ontario
(https://www.computeontario.ca/) and the Digital Research Alliance of Canada
(alliancecan.ca).

References
 [1] Held, C.: The Kochen-Specker Theorem. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
     University (2000). https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/kochen-specker/

 [2] Bell, J.S.: Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics: Collected Papers
     on Quantum Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2004). https:
     //doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511815676

 [3] Kochen, S., Specker, E.P.: The Problem of Hidden Variables in Quantum
     Mechanics. Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics 17, 59–87 (1967) https:
     //doi.org/10.1007/978-94-010-1795-4 17

 [4] Bell, J.S.: On the problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics. Rev. Mod.
     Phys. 38, 447–452 (1966) https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.38.447

 [5] Conway, J., Kochen, S.: The free will theorem. Foundations of Physics 36, 1441–
     1473 (2006) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-006-9068-6

 [6] Cañas, G., Arias, M., Etcheverry, S., Gómez, E.S., Cabello, A., Xavier, G.B., Lima,
     G.: Applying the simplest Kochen-Specker set for quantum information processing.
     Physical Review Letters 113(9) (2014) https://doi.org/10.1103/physrevlett.113.
     090404

 [7] Cabello, A., D’Ambrosio, V., Nagali, E., Sciarrino, F.: Hybrid ququart-encoded
     quantum cryptography protected by Kochen-Specker contextuality. Physical
     Review A 84(3), 030302 (2011) https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.84.030302


                                           20
 [8] Cubitt, T.S., Leung, D., Matthews, W., Winter, A.: Improving zero-error classical
     communication with entanglement. Physical Review Letters 104(23), 230503
     (2010) https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.104.230503

 [9] Gühne, O., Budroni, C., Cabello, A., Kleinmann, M., Larsson, J.-Å.: Bounding
     the quantum dimension with contextuality. Physical Review A 89(6), 062107
     (2014) https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.89.062107

[10] Santos, E.: Critical analysis of the empirical tests of local hidden-variable theories.
     Phys. Rev. A 46, 3646–3656 (1992) https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.46.3646

[11] Larsson, J.-Å.: A kochen-specker inequality. Europhysics Letters 58(6), 799 (2002)

[12] Kochen, S., Specker, E.P.: The problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics.
     In: The Logico-Algebraic Approach to Quantum Mechanics, pp. 293–328. Springer,
     Dordrecht (1975). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-010-1795-4 17

[13] Peres, A.: Two simple proofs of the Kochen–Specker theorem. Journal of Physics A:
     Mathematical and General 24(4), 175 (1991) https://doi.org/10.1088/0305-4470/
     24/4/003

[14] Peres, A.: Quantum theory: concepts and methods 72 (1997) https://doi.org/10.
     1007/0-306-47120-5

[15] Bub, J.: Schütte’s tautology and the Kochen–Specker theorem. Foundations of
     Physics 26(6), 787–806 (1996) https://doi.org/10.1007/bf02058633

[16] Cabello, A.: How many questions do you need to prove that unasked questions
     have no answers? International Journal of Quantum Information 04(01), 55–61
     (2006) https://doi.org/10.1142/s021974990600161x

[17] Arends, F., Ouaknine, J., Wampler, C.W.: On searching for small Kochen-Specker
     vector systems (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-25870-1 4

[18] Uijlen, S., Westerbaan, B.: A Kochen-Specker system has at least 22 vec-
     tors. New Generation Computing 34(1), 3–23 (2016) https://doi.org/10.1007/
     s00354-016-0202-5

[19] Kirchweger, M., Peitl, T., Szeider, S.: Co-Certificate Learning with SAT Modulo
     Symmetries. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization,
     California. Main Track, to appear (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.
     10427

[20] Pavičić, M.: Arbitrarily exhaustive hypergraph generation of 4-, 6-, 8-, 16-, and
     32-dimensional quantum contextual sets. Physical Review A 95(6), 062121 (2017)

[21] Budroni, C., Cabello, A., Gühne, O., Kleinmann, M., Larsson, J.-Å.: Kochen-
     specker contextuality. Reviews of Modern Physics 94(4), 045007 (2022)


                                            21
[22] Held, C.: Kochen–Specker theorem. In: Compendium of Quantum Physics,
     pp. 331–335. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/
     978-3-540-70626-7 104

[23] Pavičić, M.: Hypergraph contextuality. Entropy 21(11), 1107 (2019)

[24] Pavičić, M., Merlet, J.-P., McKay, B., Megill, N.D.: Kochen–Specker vectors.
     Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General 38(7), 1577 (2005)

[25] Pavičić, M.: Quantum contextuality. Quantum 7, 953 (2023)

[26] Peres, A.: Two simple proofs of the Kochen–Specker theorem. Journal of Physics
     A: Mathematical and General 24(4), 175–178 (1991) https://doi.org/10.1088/
     0305-4470/24/4/003

[27] Pavicic, M., Megill, N.D.: Automated generation of arbitrarily many Kochen-
     Specker and other contextual sets in odd-dimensional Hilbert spaces. Phys.
     Rev. A 106(6), 060203–1 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.106.L060203
     arXiv:2202.08197 [quant-ph]

[28] Biere, A., Heule, M., Maaren, H., Walsh, T. (eds.): Handbook of Satisfiability.
     IOS Press, Amsterdam (2021). https://doi.org/10.3233/faia336

[29] Ganesh, V., Vardi, M.Y.: On the Unreasonable Effectiveness of SAT Solvers.
     Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2020). https://doi.org/10.1017/
     9781108637435.032

[30] Metin, H., Baarir, S., Colange, M., Kordon, F.: CDCLSym: Introducing Effective
     Symmetry Breaking in SAT Solving. Springer, New York (2018). https://doi.org/
     10.1007/978-3-319-89960-2 6

[31] Bright, C., Kotsireas, I., Ganesh, V.: When satisfiability solving meets symbolic
     computation. Communications of the ACM 65(7), 64–72 (2022) https://doi.org/
     10.1145/3500921

[32] Aloul, F.A., Sakallah, K.A., Markov, I.L.: Efficient Symmetry Breaking for Boolean
     Satisfiability. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA (2003).
     https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/1630659.1630699

[33] Barrett, C., Fontaine, P., Tinelli, C.: The Satisfiability Modulo Theories Library
     (SMT-LIB). www.SMT-LIB.org (2016)

[34] Zulkoski, E., Ganesh, V., Czarnecki, K.: MathCheck: A Math Assistant via a
     Combination of Computer Algebra Systems and SAT Solvers. Springer, Cham
     (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-21401-6 41

[35] Ábrahám, E.: Building bridges between symbolic computation and satisfiability
     checking (2015). https://doi.org/10.1145/2755996.2756636


                                          22
[36] Kaufmann, D., Biere, A.: Improving AMulet2 for verifying multiplier circuits
     using SAT solving and computer algebra. International Journal on Software Tools
     for Technology Transfer (2023) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-022-00688-6

[37] Mahzoon, A., Große, D., Scholl, C., Konrad, A., Drechsler, R.: Formal verification
     of modular multipliers using symbolic computer algebra and boolean satisfiability.
     In: Proceedings of the 59th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference. ACM,
     New York (2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3489517.3530605

[38] Mahzoon, A., Große, D., Drechsler, R.: Combining symbolic computer algebra and
     boolean satisfiability for automatic debugging and fixing of complex multipliers.
     In: 2018 IEEE Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI), pp.
     351–356 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/ISVLSI.2018.00071

[39] Heule, M.J.H., Kauers, M., Seidl, M.: New ways to multiply 3×3-matrices. Journal
     of Symbolic Computation 104, 899–916 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsc.2020.
     10.003

[40] Neiman, D., Mackey, J., Heule, M.: Tighter bounds on directed Ramsey num-
     ber R(7). Graphs and Combinatorics 38(5) (2022) https://doi.org/10.1007/
     s00373-022-02560-5

[41] Bright, C., Ganesh, V., Heinle, A., Kotsireas, I., Nejati, S., Czarnecki, K.:
     MathCheck2: A SAT+CAS verifier for combinatorial conjectures (2016). https:
     //doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-45641-6 9

[42] England, M.: SC-Square: Overview to 2021. In: Bright, C., Davenport, J. (eds.)
     Proceedings of the 6th SC-Square Workshop, pp. 1–6 (2022). https://ceur-ws.org/
     Vol-3273/invited1.pdf

[43] Jost, R.: Measures on the finite dimensional subspaces of a Hilbert space:
     remarks to a theorem by A. M. Gleason. Studies in Mathematical Physics:
     Essays in Honour of Valentine Bergmann, 209–228 (1976) https://doi.org/10.
     1515/9781400868940-011

[44] Li, Z., Bright, C., Ganesh, V.: An sc-square approach to the minimum kochen-
     specker problem. In: Uncu, A.K., Barbosa, H. (eds.) Proceedings of the 7th
     SC-Square Workshop Co-located with the Federated Logic Conference, SC-
     Square@FLoC 2022, as a Part of the 11th International Joint Conference on
     Automated Reasoning, IJCAR 2022, Haifa, Israel, August 12, 2022. CEUR
     Workshop Proceedings, vol. 3458, pp. 55–66. CEUR-WS.org, ??? (2022). https:
     //ceur-ws.org/Vol-3458/paper6.pdf

[45] Zhengyu Li, V.G. Curtis Bright: A sat solver and computer algebra attack on the
     minimum kochen-specker problem. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
     Artificial Intelligence (2024)



                                          23
[46] Bright, C., Cheung, K.K.H., Stevens, B., Kotsireas, I., Ganesh, V.: A SAT-
     based Resolution of Lam’s Problem. AAAI Press, California USA (2021). https:
     //doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v35i5.16483

[47] Junttila, T., Karppa, M., Kaski, P., Kohonen, J.: An adaptive prefix-assignment
     technique for symmetry reduction. Journal of Symbolic Computation 99, 21–49
     (2020) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsc.2019.03.002

[48] Savela, J., Oikarinen, E., Järvisalo, M.: Finding Periodic Apartments via Boolean
     Satisfiability and Orderly Generation. EasyChair, UK (2020). https://doi.org/10.
     29007/k8jd

[49] Crawford, J.M., Ginsberg, M.L., Luks, E.M., Roy, A.: Symmetry-breaking
     predicates for search problems. In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Con-
     ference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning. KR’96, pp.
     148–159. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA (1996).
     https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3087368.3087386

[50] Heule, M.J.H.: Optimal symmetry breaking for graph problems. Mathe-
     matics in Computer Science 13(4), 533–548 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1007/
     s11786-019-00397-5

[51] Sellmann, M., Hentenryck, P.V.: Structural Symmetry Breaking. Professional
     Book Center, California (2005). http://ijcai.org/Proceedings/05/Papers/1121.pdf

[52] Kirchweger, M., Szeider, S.: SAT Modulo Symmetries for Graph Generation.
     Schloss Dagstuhl, Dagstuhl, Germany (2021). https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.CP.
     2021.34

[53] Kirchweger, M., Scheucher, M., Szeider, S.: A SAT Attack on Rota’s Basis
     Conjecture. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik (2022). https:
     //doi.org/10.4230/LIPICS.SAT.2022.4

[54] Bright, C., Kotsireas, I., Ganesh, V.: Applying computer algebra systems with
     SAT solvers to the Williamson conjecture. Journal of Symbolic Computation 100,
     187–209 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsc.2019.07.024

[55] Gerlach, W., Stern, O.: Der experimentelle nachweis der richtungsquantelung im
     magnetfeld. Zeitschrift für Physik 9, 349–352 (1922) https://doi.org/10.1007/
     BF01326983

[56] Huang, Y.-F., Li, C.-F., Zhang, Y.-S., Pan, J.-W., Guo, G.-C.: Experimental
     test of the Kochen-Specker theorem with single photons. Physical Review Letters
     90(25) (2003) https://doi.org/10.1103/physrevlett.90.250401

[57] Pavičić, M., Merlet, J.-P., McKay, B., Megill, N.D.: Kochen–Specker vectors.
     Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General 38(7), 1577–1592 (2005) https:


                                          24
    //doi.org/10.1088/0305-4470/38/7/013

[58] Heule, M.J.H., Kullmann, O., Wieringa, S., Biere, A.: Cube and conquer:
     Guiding CDCL SAT solvers by lookaheads (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/
     978-3-642-34188-5 8

[59] Heule, M.J.H., Kullmann, O., Marek, V.W.: Solving and verifying the boolean
     pythagorean triples problem via cube-and-conquer. In: Creignou, N., Le Berre, D.
     (eds.) Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing – SAT 2016, pp. 228–245.
     Springer, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-40970-2 15

[60] Heule, M.: Schur number five. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence, vol. 32. AAAI Press, California (2018). https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.
     v32i1.12209

[61] McKay, B.D., Piperno, A.: Practical graph isomorphism, II. Journal of Symbolic
     Computation 60, 94–112 (2014) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsc.2013.09.003

[62] Lisoněk, P., Badzia̧g, P., Portillo, J.R., Cabello, A.: Kochen-Specker set with seven
     contexts. Physical Review A 89(4) (2014) https://doi.org/10.1103/physreva.89.
     042101

[63] Codish, M., Miller, A., Prosser, P., Stuckey, P.J.: Constraints for symmetry
     breaking in graph representation. Constraints 24(1), 1–24 (2019) https://doi.org/
     10.1007/s10601-018-9294-5

[64] Knuth, D.E.: The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 4, Fascicle 6: Satisfia-
     bility. Addison-Wesley Professional, Massachusetts (2015). https://dl.acm.org/
     doi/abs/10.5555/2898950

[65] Read, R.C.: Every one a winner or how to avoid isomorphism search when
     cataloguing combinatorial configurations. Elsevier, Amsterdam (1978). https:
     //doi.org/10.1016/S0167-5060(08)70325-X

[66] Faradžev, I.A.: Constructive enumeration of combinatorial objects (1978)

[67] Biere, A., Fazekas, K., Fleury, M., Heisinger, M.: CaDiCaL, Kissat, Paracooba,
     Plingeling and Treengeling Entering the SAT Competition 2020. University of
     Helsinki, Helsinki (2020). http://hdl.handle.net/10138/318754

[68] Liang, J.H., Ganesh, V., Poupart, P., Czarnecki, K.: Learning Rate Based Branch-
     ing Heuristic for SAT Solvers (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-40970-2
     9

[69] de Moura, L., Bjørner, N.: Z3: An efficient SMT solver (2008). https://doi.org/10.
     1007/978-3-540-78800-3 24

[70] Jovanović, D., de Moura, L.: Solving non-linear arithmetic (2012). https://doi.


                                            25
    org/10.1007/978-3-642-31365-3 27

[71] Heule, M.J.H., Kullmann, O., Marek, V.W.: Solving very hard problems: Cube-
     and-conquer, a hybrid SAT solving method. In: IJCAI, vol. 17, pp. 228–245 (2017).
     https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2017/683

[72] Heule, M.J.H., Kullmann, O., Marek, V.W.: Solving and verifying the boolean
     Pythagorean triples problem via cube-and-conquer. In: International Conference
     on Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing, pp. 228–245. Springer, Cham
     (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-40970-2 15

[73] Jha, P., Li, Z., Lu, Z., Bright, C., Ganesh, V.: AlphaMapleSAT: An MCTS-based
     Cube-and-Conquer SAT Solver for Hard Combinatorial Problems. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2401.13770 (2024)

[74] Wetzler, N., Heule, M.J.H., Hunt, W.A.: DRAT-trim: Efficient checking and
     trimming using expressive clausal proofs. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
     ence vol. 8561, pp. 422–429. Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/
     978-3-319-09284-3 31

[75] Bright, C., Cheung, K.K.H., Stevens, B., Kotsireas, I., Ganesh, V.: Nonexistence
     certificates for ovals in a projective plane of order ten. In: Lecture Notes in
     Computer Science vol. 12126, pp. 97–111. Springer, Cham (2020). https://doi.
     org/10.1007/978-3-030-48966-3 8

[76] Hagberg, A.A., Schult, D.A., Swart, P.J.: Exploring Network Structure, Dynamics,
     and Function using NetworkX, Pasadena, CA USA (2008). https://www.osti.gov/
     biblio/960616

[77] Li, Z., Bright, C., Ganesh, V.: A SAT Solver + Computer Algebra Attack on
     the Minimum Kochen–Specker Problem. Technical report, https://cs.curtisbright.
     com/reports/nmi-ks-preprint.pdf (2022)




                                         26
