Proceedings of Machine Learning Research vol 336:1–6, 2026                39th Annual Conference on Learning Theory




 Open Problem: How much overparametrization is needed for ALS in
                    tensor decomposition?
Dionysis Arvanitakis                                                    DIONARVA @ U . NORTHWESTERN . EDU
Northwestern University
Vaidehi Srinivas                                                          VAIDEHI @ U . NORTHWESTERN . EDU
Northwestern University
Aravindan Vijayaraghavan                                                  ARAVINDV @ NORTHWESTERN . EDU
Northwestern University


Editors: Steve Hanneke and Tor Lattimore


                                                          Abstract
     We ask how much overparameterization is needed for simple iterative methods such as alternating
     least squares (ALS) and gradient descent to decompose a third-order tensor. This question can be
     viewed as a basic setting to study feature learning: when a rank-r tensor in ambient dimension n has
     r ! n, the latent rank-one components are the features, and k is the amount of overparameterization
     used by the algorithm. For rank r tensors, recent work shows that overparametrized rank k “ Opr2 q
     suffices for the popular ALS heuristic (with random initialization) to converge to a global optima. Is
     the quadratic dependence on r an inherent barrier for ALS-like methods? We pose the open problem
     of proving convergence to the global optimum for k “ opr2 q, or proving that a lower bound on the
     overparametrized rank of k “ Ωpr1`c q for some absolute constant c ą 0 is necessary.
     Keywords: Tensor decomposition, Iterative methods, Non-convex optimization, Alternating least
     squares, Gradient descent


1. Introduction
Tensor decomposition is a canonical non-convex optimization problem. Given a third-order ten-
sor T P Rnˆnˆn , the tensor decomposition (also called CP decomposition) problem asks for a
representation
                                         ÿr
                                     T “    ai b bi b ci ,                                (1)
                                                          i“1
where ai , bi , ci P Rn . Tensor methods have played a central role in algorithms for latent variable
models, mixtures, topic models, independent component analysis, and related problems; see, e.g.,
Kolda and Bader (2009); Moitra (2018). In the worst case, tensor rank and tensor decomposition
are computationally intractable (Håstad, 1990; Hillar and Lim, 2013). Nevertheless, under suitable
genericity, incoherence, orthogonality, or smoothed-analysis assumptions, there are polynomial-
time algorithms based on diagonalization, tensor power methods, spectral methods, sum-of-squares,
and algebraic techniques (Harshman, 1970; Leurgans et al., 1993; Bhaskara et al., 2014a; Ma et al.,
2016; Sharan and Valiant, 2017; Vijayaraghavan; Kothari et al., 2025).
    In practice, however, the workhorse algorithms are much simpler iterative methods: alternating
least squares (ALS), alternating minimization, and gradient descent Kolda and Bader (2009). These
methods minimize the least-squares objective
                                                      ›                      ›2
                                                      ›   ÿk                 ›
                                        min            T´     xi b y i b z i › .                  (2)
                                                      ›                      ›
                                                      ›
                               xi ,yi ,zi PRn , iPrks ›                      ›
                                                          i“1               F


© 2026 D. Arvanitakis, V. Srinivas & A. Vijayaraghavan.
                             A RVANITAKIS S RINIVAS V IJAYARAGHAVAN




When k “ r, the parameterization matches the target rank. In the overparameterized regime, the
algorithm is allowed to output a decomposition with k ą r terms. Overparameterization is known
empirically to make non-convex optimization easier, but it is still poorly understood even in struc-
tured problems such as tensor decomposition. Moreover, this also makes tensor decomposition a
basic setting to understand feature learning in machine learning. An algorithm that finds a de-
composition of rank k ! n from random initialization learns a simple feature representation of
the data, e.g., in the ground-truth rank-r decomposition, the unknown rank-one components are
low-dimensional latent features.
Prior work on ALS and Gradient Descent. Observe that if tyi uki“1 and tzi uki“1 are fixed then
optimizing over txi uki“1 constitutes a simple linear least squares problem that can be solved ef-
ficiently (the same of course holds for the other two modes as well). The algorithm that we are
mostly interested in for our questions, called alternating least squares (ALS), iteratively fixes two of
the three modes and optimizes over the third. The method continues by alternating between modes
until convergence.
      A recent result of Arvanitakis et al. (2025) gives the first global convergence guarantee for ALS
with moderate overparameterization. Informally, if T has a mildly conditioned rank-r decomposi-
tion and n is sufficiently large compared to r, then a parallel variant of ALS initialized randomly
and run with rank k “ Opr2 q converges with high probability to a global optimum of (2). This
improves over earlier guarantees of Wang et al. (2020) for a variant of gradient descent requiring
k “ Opr7.5 log nq, and it is essentially independent of the ambient dimension n.
      The proof of Arvanitakis et al. (2025) reveals a natural r2 -dimensional bottleneck. The analysis
succeeds by showing that, after random initialization, the algorithmic Khatri–Rao features txi d
yi uki“1 span the column span of all the pairwise products in the Kronecker product A b B. This
span-containment argument requires k “ Ωpr2 q and does not extend below the quadratic threshold.
The central question is whether this is an artifact of the analysis, or a genuine limitation of ALS
and related iterative algorithms. Experiments in Arvanitakis et al. (2025) suggest that superlinear
overparameterization is indeed necessary.

2. Open Problems
We now formally pose our question. Let
                                              r
                                              ÿ
                                        T “         aj b b j b c j ,                                (3)
                                              j“1
    where the factor matrices are A “ ra1 ¨ ¨ ¨ ar s, B “ rb1 ¨ ¨ ¨ br s, and C “ rc1 ¨ ¨ ¨ cr s and
r ! n. We are most interested in the setting where the factors are “typical”, and not worst-case. We
will state our problems in the smoothed analysis setting where the factors are drawn generically i.e.,
they are obtained by perturbing arbitrary well-conditioned factors by small independent Gaussian
noise, as described below.
Smoothed Analysis Setting. Let A, B, C be arbitrary n ˆ r matrices. For each i P rrs, the factor
                                                   ` 2 ˘n
ai is a random perturbation of ai i.e., ai ´ ai „ N 0, ρn ; similarly bi ´ bi , and ci ´ ci are also
                                                     2
drawn i.i.d. from the Gaussian with covariance ρn I. We will think of ρ « 1{ polyprq, so the random
perturbations all have average length 1{ polyprq.
    Given as input T , we run an iterative algorithm such as ALS or gradient descent on (2) with
algorithmic rank k and random initialization.

                                                     2
                           R EQUIRED OVERPARAMETERIZATION FOR ALS




Open Problem 1 (Broad open question) What is the smallest value of k “ kprq so that ALS (or
other iterative algorithms like GD) on smoothed instances (under random initialization) converges
to the global optimum with high probability (over the smoothed instance)?
   We split this up into two questions— one algorithmic, and the other a lower bound question,
which together aim to make progress towards the above question beyond the current state-of-the-art.
Open Problem 2 (Subquadratic overparameterization for iterative tensor decomposition) Given
as input a smoothed tensor T P Rnˆnˆn as described above with ρ “ 1{ polyprq, does over-
parametrization of k “ opr2 q suffice for ALS or gradient descent (or other iterative algorithms)
to find with high probability (over the randomness in the instance) a rank-k decomposition in time
polypn, r, logp1{ϵqq satisfying
                                 ›    k
                                      ÿ              ›
                                 ›T ´   xi b yi b zi › ď ε}T }F ?
                                 ›                   ›
                                                         F
                                       i“1

     A positive resolution to the above question entails an algorithmic guarantee for an iterative algo-
rithm like ALS or gradient descent. While the above question was phrased for smoothed instances,
it is conceivable that the result holds for any instance with a well-conditioned distribution i.e., the
condition number σ1 pAq{σr pAq is upper bounded by polyprq (and similarly for B, C). We also
remark that the high probability is over the randomness in smoothed analysis (since the input is
only drawn once). However for a fixed input, a success probability of a constant (or even inverse
polynomial) over the random initialization would be sufficient for our purposes— we can then try
out many random initializations to successfully decompose the tensor.
     We also remark that there exist more sophisticated algebraic methods e.g., simultaneous diago-
nalization that recover the ground-truth decomposition for generic/ smoothed tensors (in fact, there
is a unique rank-r decomposition for a generic tensor) Harshman (1972); Bhaskara et al. (2014a);
Koiran (2024); Kothari et al. (2025) with polynomial time guarantees in the setting of Open Prob-
lem 2. However, the focus of our open question is to understand the performance of iterative meth-
ods. The above algorithmic problem is also interesting to explore for random instances (where the
factors are Gaussian or random unit vectors), where one may hope for even stronger guarantees on
k or a wider range of r e.g., the overcomplete setting with r " n (Ge and Ma, 2017).
     A negative resolution would be just as interesting. In fact, resolving the following open question
would represent a striking lower bound against iterative methods.
Open Problem 3 (Polynomial lower bound) Can one prove that there exists a universal constant
c ą 0 such that ALS and gradient descent (and other iterative methods) require overparametrization
of k “ r1`c i.e., given a smoothed instance as described earlier and overparametrized rank k ď
r1`c , the algorithm converges to a solution of positive objective value with constant probability?
    We suspect that if such a lower bound holds, it likely holds even for random tensors of this
rank. Moreover, it is even conceivable that the above lower bound holds even for rank k “ r2´c
for a small constant c ą 0. Providing an explicit tensor (with well-conditioned factors) for which
ALS fails unless k “ Θpr2 q would be interesting, but the most compelling lower bound would not
rely on worst-case pathological tensors. Instead, it would show that for a random rank-r tensor,
or a smoothed tensor an overparameterized rank below r2 leads to a genuine obstruction. We are
particularly interested in the lower bound for random tensors, where experimental results show that
superlinear overparameterization is indeed necessary (see Arvanitakis et al. (2025)).

                                                   3
                             A RVANITAKIS S RINIVAS V IJAYARAGHAVAN




3. Why this question is interesting
Tensor decomposition provides a compelling testbed for understanding overparameterization and
feature learning in non-convex optimization. In many learning problems the ambient dimension
n is very large, while the intrinsic number of latent features is much smaller, say r ! n. Ten-
sor decomposition is one of the simplest settings where this structure is explicit: the unknown
factors taj , bj , cj urj“1 are the latent features, and the optimization algorithm must discover a low-
dimensional feature space containing them from random initialization. Thus, as k gets closer to r,
the algorithm must learn the true feature structure using only mild overparameterization.
    This setting is attractive because it is algebraically structured enough that sharp statements may
be possible, while the objective (2) already contains many difficulties from modern machine learn-
ing: non-convexity, spurious stationary points, and feature discovery from random initialization. A
positive answer would give a clean example of feature learning in a nonlinear, non-convex model
beyond the lazy-training or kernel regime. A negative answer would be equally informative: it
would suggest that even when the statistical model has only r latent degrees of freedom, local dy-
namics may require many more algorithmic features to reliably find them. Moreover, although more
sophisticated polynomial-time algorithms are known in this regime, the methods of choice in prac-
tice are scalable iterative heuristics such as ALS and gradient descent (Ballard and Kolda, 2025);
despite their wide use, their behavior is still poorly understood.
    Resolving either open problem would be technically interesting for the following reasons.
     • A positive resolution of Open Problem 2 would show that simple iterative methods can ex-
       ploit low-rank tensor structure much more efficiently than current analyses suggest. Proving
       guarantees below rank r2 appears to require a more global analysis of how random initial-
       ization, alternating updates, and nonlinear feature interactions gradually align with the true
       components, going beyond the current proof strategy based on the r2 -dimensional Kronecker
       lift of the factor matrices. This could provide a new mechanism for understanding feature
       learning under mild overparameterization, distinct from analyses based on very large overpa-
       rameterization or near-linearized dynamics.
     • Conversely, a positive resolution of Open Problem 3 would identify an inherent optimization
       barrier: although the target tensor has only r components and is statistically well-conditioned,
       local iterative dynamics may require about r2 algorithmic components to escape poor align-
       ment. Such a lower bound for random or smoothed instances would highlight a fundamental
       difference between practical instances and average-case models, and would motivate more
       refined beyond-worst-case assumptions for tensor inputs.
     • Finally there appears to be an algorithmic phase transition at overparameterization rank of
       r2 : while finding a decomposition of rank r2 is easy, as it reduces to a matrix problem (see
       e.g. Bhaskara et al. (2014b)), all known algorithms that can decompose a tensor using less
       than r2 seem to use more sophisticated ideas. In fact, we are not aware of any algorithm
       that decomposes a tensor with overparameterization less than r2 without also recovering the
       unique decomposition of rank r. It would be very interesting to understand where iterative
       methods lie: can they go beyond matrices and exploit the tensor structure of the problem?
Prize. As a lower bound (Problem 3) is established as Ωprp1`αq q and an upper bound (Problem
2) is established as Oprp1`βq q, we (the authors) will donate p1 ´ pβ ´ αqq ˆ $300 to research in
treating Amytrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), totaling $300 when the upper and lower bounds meet.
In addition, the first authors to publish an improvement to either bound will receive coffee from
Metropolis coffee, the best coffee roaster in Chicago, perhaps the world.

                                                   4
                         R EQUIRED OVERPARAMETERIZATION FOR ALS




References
Dionysis Arvanitakis, Vaidehi Srinivas, and Aravindan Vijayaraghavan. Guarantees for alternat-
  ing least squares in overparameterized tensor decompositions. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 38:78062–78112, 2025.

Grey Ballard and Tamara G. Kolda. Tensor Decompositions for Data Science. Cambridge University
  Press, 2025.

Aditya Bhaskara, Moses Charikar, Ankur Moitra, and Aravindan Vijayaraghavan. Smoothed anal-
  ysis of tensor decompositions. In Symposium on the Theory of Computing (STOC), 2014a.

Aditya Bhaskara, Moses Charikar, and Aravindan Vijayaraghavan. Uniqueness of tensor decompo-
  sitions with applications to polynomial identifiability. Conference on Learning Theory, 2014b.

Rong Ge and Tengyu Ma. On the optimization landscape of tensor decompositions. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems 30. 2017.

Richard A. Harshman. Foundations of the parafac procedure: Models and conditions for an “ex-
  planatory” multimodal factor analysis. UCLA Working Papers in Phonetics, 16:1–84, 1970.

Richard A. Harshman. Determination and proof of minimum uniqueness conditions for
  PARAFAC1. UCLA Working Papers in Phonetics, 22:111–117, 1972. URL https://
  psychology.uwo.ca/faculty/harshman/wpppfac1.pdf.

Johan Håstad. Tensor rank is NP-complete. Journal of Algorithms, 11(4), 1990.

Christopher J. Hillar and Lek-Heng Lim. Most tensor problems are NP-hard. Journal of the Amer-
  ican Mathematical Society, 60, 2013.

Pascal Koiran. On the uniqueness and computation of commuting extensions. Linear Algebra
  and its Applications, 703:645–666, 2024. ISSN 0024-3795. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.laa.
  2024.10.004. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S0024379524003835.

Tamara G. Kolda and Brett W. Bader. Tensor decompositions and applications. SIAM review, 51
  (3):455–500, 2009.

Pravesh K Kothari, Ankur Moitra, and Alexander S Wein. Overcomplete tensor decomposition via
  koszul-young flattenings. In 2025 IEEE 66th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
  Science (FOCS), pages 1871–1882. IEEE, 2025.

S. E. Leurgans, R. T. Ross, and R. B. Abel. A decomposition for three-way arrays. SIAM Journal
   on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 14(4):1064–1083, 1993. doi: 10.1137/0614071. URL
   https://doi.org/10.1137/0614071.

Tengyu Ma, Jonathan Shi, and David Steurer. Polynomial-time tensor decompositions with sum-
  of-squares. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual IEEE Symposium on the Foundations of Computer
  Science (FOCS), 2016.

                                               5
                           A RVANITAKIS S RINIVAS V IJAYARAGHAVAN




Ankur Moitra. Algorithmic Aspects of Machine Learning. Cambridge University Press, 2018. doi:
  10.1017/9781316882177.

Vatsal Sharan and Gregory Valiant. Orthogonalized als: A theoretically principled tensor decom-
  position algorithm for practical use. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
  3095–3104. PMLR, 2017.

Aravindan Vijayaraghavan. chapter 19 Efficient Tensor Decomposition. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2007.15589.

Xiang Wang, Chenwei Wu, Jason D Lee, Tengyu Ma, and Rong Ge. Beyond lazy training for over-
  parameterized tensor decomposition. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  21934–21944, 2020.




                                              6
