Proceedings of Machine Learning Research vol :1–6, 2026




   Invited Open Problem: Is the Power of Deep Learning over Linear
              Models Inherently Distribution Dependent?

Vitaly Feldman                                                               VITALY. EDU @ GMAIL . COM
Apple
Pritish Kamath                                                                PRITISH @ ALUM . MIT. EDU
Google Research
Nathan Srebro                                                                          NATI @ TTIC . EDU
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago




                                                          Abstract
     We ask whether distribution-independent SQ learning implies low dimension complexity, and
     whether anything learnable with (S)GD on a (benign) neural network under any input distribution
     is also learnable with a linear model.


1. Background and Framing
What is the power of deep learning over linear (or kernel) models? Or are linear models already
“universal”, so that anything learnable via deep learning, or perhaps any method, is also learnable
via a linear model?
      If we are only concerned with sample complexity, ignore computation, and consider intractable
Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) learning, Ben-David et al. (2002) already established linear
(or kernel) models are not universal: there are hypothesis classes learnable with a small number of
samples that require exponentially higher dimensionality (or norm) to represent with a linear model.
More formally, Ben-David et al. defined the dimension complexity dc(H) of a binary hypothesis
class H ⊆ {±1}X as the smallest dimension d s.t. there exists a feature map φ : X → Rd allowing
linear representation of H (i.e. s.t. ∀h∈H ∃w∈Rd ∀x h(x) = sign(⟨w, φ(x)⟩)), and proved that it could
be much higher than the VC dimension of H. It is not difficult to realize some of these classes,
e.g. the class of all 2n parities over n input bits, as small neural networks. This implies a sample
complexity separation between ERM on neural networks vs learning with linear (or kernel) models.
      But ERM on a neural network is neither worst-case tractable nor realistically implementable—
instead neural networks are typically trained using (Stochastic) Gradient Descent (SGD, or similar
gradient-based methods), which is rather different from ERM. Additionally, on the classes for which
it is easy to show a sample complexity gap vs linear models, like parities, (S)GD fails at learning—at
least for a worst-case input distribution.
      Thanks to the implicit bias of Gradient Descent, it is also possible to show a sample complexity
benefit of (S)GD on a neural network versus linear models: Gradient Descent on a “diagonal linear
network” can learn 1-sparse functions on n inputs (i.e. the class H = {x 7→ ⟨ei , x⟩ | i = 1, . . . , n}
of coordinate projections) using O(log n) samples (Woodworth et al., 2020; Chou et al., 2023),
while linear models would require Ω(dc(H)) = Ω(n) samples. But the size of the network, and
hence computational cost, is still Ω(dc(H)). Thus, while there is an exponential sample complexity
benefit here, there isn’t such a benefit in terms of the size of the model or the computational cost.

© 2026 V. Feldman, P. Kamath & N. Srebro.
                                     F ELDMAN K AMATH S REBRO




     This prompts us to modify the question about the power of deep learning over linear models,
focusing on model size and computational cost: is anything learnable by (S)GD on a neural network
also learnable using a linear model of dimension proportional to the size of the neural network and
training time? Or are there problems learnable by a small neural network using a reasonable number
of (S)GD iterations, that would require dimension exponentially larger to learn using a linear model?
     Indeed, there are many known examples of problems learnable by (S)GD on a neural network,
that would require dimension exponential in the network size and SGD computational effort to rep-
resent and learn using linear models (and this in turn also provides a lower bound on the sample
complexity using kernel methods). However, as far as we are aware, all of these are distribution-
dependent. That is, these are examples of a hypothesis class H and an explicit input distribution
D over X , such that for any h⋆ ∈ H, (S)GD on samples x ∼ D labeled (perhaps noisily) by
h⋆ , succeeds in learning. A simple example is the class of parities mentioned above, with a dis-
tribution D which is a mixture of a uniform distribution over {±1}n and a distribution which is
uniform over 1-sparse inputs. Although parities are hard to learn in the worst case (with noisy
labels, or with a Statistical Query (SQ) algorithm (Kearns, 1998)), this specific input distribution
creates strong correlation between bits in the support of the parity and the output, and can thus be
easily learned, e.g. by a simple SQ algorithm. Indeed, (S)GD on a neural network can also pick up
these correlations and learn the parity (Malach et al., 2021; Medvedev et al., 2026). However, even
on this “easy” distribution, it is still impossible to even approximately represent parities using linear
separators in dimension 2o(n) . See Malach et al. (2021) for a discussion of how other separation
results are also distribution-dependent. More recently, the staircase property (Abbe et al., 2021a,
2022) has been used to understand situations where (S)GD on a neural net (or alternatively, SQ
algorithms) succeed, even when linear (or kernel) methods fail. Importantly, the staircase property
is distribution-dependent as the basis used in the staircase is orthonormal w.r.t. the specific input
distribution D. In fact, in the parity example, the specific input distribution used can be understood
as changing the basis so as to provide a staircase.
     What we ask here is whether such a separation (between the size and computational cost of deep
learning vs the dimensionality needed for linear learning) is inherently distribution-dependent, or
whether it is possible to show hypothesis classes that are learnable by (S)GD on a (simple, benign
and realistic) neural network w.r.t. all input distributions, but have dimension complexity much
higher than the size of the network and number of (S)GD steps.
     Viewing Statistical Query (SQ) learning as a useful guide for understanding deep learning, and
realistic noise-tolerant learning more generally, we also pose a similar (though not formally related)
question about the relationship between distribution-independent SQ learning and the dimension
complexity: If a hypothesis class H is (m, τ )-SQ-learnable for all input distributions, does this
imply dc(H) = O(m/τ 2 ) ?


2. Learning with SGD over Neural Networks
We first formally define an SGD learning procedure over a neural network. For concreteness and
simplicity we focus on fully connected ReLU networks over inputs in X = {±1}n . An archi-
tecture is thus defined by a depth L and widths n1 , n2 , . . . , nL−1 where we have n0 = n input
units and PnL = 1 output unit. The parameters θ = (θ1 , θ2 , . . . , θL ) ∈ RS of the network are
the S := L   i=1 ni ni−1 weights on each of the edges, and the output of the network is defined as
fθ (x) = θL σ(θL−1 σ(· · · σ(θ1 x) · · · )), where σ(z) = max(0, z) operates elementwise. For an in-

                                                   2
                         P OWER OF D EEP L EARNING OVER L INEAR M ODELS




put distribution D over X and a target h⋆ ∈ {±1}X , SGD with stepsize η operates as follows: each
weight of θ(0) is drawn independently from a Gaussian, where elements in θi have variance 1/ni−1
(i.e. standard initialization). At each step t = 0, . . . , T − 1, we draw a sample x(t) ∼ D and perform
the update: θ(t+1) ← θ(t) − η∇θ ℓ(h⋆ (x(t) )fθ(t)(x(t) )), where ℓ(z):= log(1 + e−z ) is the logistic
                                                     PT
loss and then return the predictor ĥ(x) = sign           t=⌈T /2⌉ fθ(t) (x) . We denote the error achieved
by ĥ as LD,h⋆ (ĥ) := Prx∼D [ĥ(x)h⋆ (x) < 0].

Open Question 1 (SGD Learning vs. Dimension Complexity) Is there a constant C such that
for all H ⊆ {±1}X over X = {±1}n , and ε < 1/4, if there exists a fully connected ReLU network
with S parameters in total, stepsize η and number of steps T , such that for every input distribution
D, every h⋆ ∈ H, SGD on the said architecture yields expected error E LD,h⋆ (ĥ) ≤ ε (expectation
over the initialization and SGD sampling), then dc(H) ≤ C · T S.

    We do not view the specifics here as critical, and we could also consider other architectures,
activation functions, loss functions, step size schedules and GD variants. We cannot, however, allow
an arbitrary architecture or an arbitrary initialization: With a specialized unrealistic architecture,
activation function, or initialization, it is possible to “cheat” and simulate any algorithm via (S)GD
on the network (Abbe and Sandon, 2020; Abbe et al., 2021b). Instead of formally defining “benign”
or “natural” networks, we state the open problem in terms of the simplest architecture. However,
the question is relevant and interesting for any “benign” architecture that avoids such “cheating”.

3. Statistical Query Learning
A τ -statistical query (SQ) oracle for input distribution D and target h⋆ , on input query q : X ×
{±1} → [−1, 1] and tolerance τ returns an arbitrary value v such that |v − Ex∼D q(x, h⋆ (x))| ≤ τ .
A (randomized) (m, τ )-statistical query (SQ) algorithm operates by making a sequence of m queries
to a τ -SQ oracle where each query can depend on all previous responses and can be selected at
random, and then returns a predictor ĥ : X → {±1}.

Open Question 2 (SQ Learning vs. Dimension Complexity) Is there a constant C such that for
every class H ⊆ {±1}X , over any domain X , and any ε < 1/4, if there exists an (m, τ )-SQ
algorithm s.t. for every input distribution D and every h⋆ ∈ H, the algorithm returns a predictor ĥ
with E LD,h⋆ (ĥ) ≤ ε (expectation over the randomness of the algorithm), then dc(H) ≤ C · m/τ 2 .

    The converse of Open Question 2 is known to hold up to a dependence on n = log |X | (the log
size of the domain, or bit complexity of representing an element x ∈ X ). Specifically, if dc(H) = d
then there is an (m, τ )-SQ PAC learning algorithm for H with m, 1/τ = poly(d, n, 1/ε). This
result is a corollary of the algorithm of Dunagan and Vempala (2004) for learning halfspaces, which
accesses data via two variants of the Perceptron algorithm and can be straightforwardly converted
to a SQ algorithm (see also Appendix A of Balcan and Feldman, 2013). The query complexity and
the inverse tolerance of the resulting algorithm are polynomial in d and log(1/γ), where γ is the
margin achieved by the linear separator. It is also well known that bit complexity lower bounds the
achievable margin as log(1/γ) = O(nd log d) (e.g. Lemma 10 in Gonen et al., 2013).
    We briefly note that weak and distribution-independent learnability via Correlational SQs (a
restriction of SQ model where the queries are of the form q(x, y) = y · q ′ (x)) is known to be equiv-
alent to polynomial margin complexity (Feldman, 2008), which is a stronger notion than dimension

                                                    3
                                    F ELDMAN K AMATH S REBRO




complexity. Distribution independent CSQ learning is however a very restricted model of learn-
ing in which even Boolean conjunctions are not efficiently PAC learnable (Feldman, 2011). It also
known that there exists function classes SQ learnable efficiently over any fixed distribution but not
efficiently SQ-learnable distribution-independently (Feldman, 2017).
     One connection between the two open problems follows from the fact that learnability with an
approximate version of gradient oracle in which the oracle is allowed to return an arbitrary vector
that is close to the true gradient (in ℓ2 norm), is known to be equivalent to SQ learning (Feldman
et al., 2021; Abbe et al., 2021b). Thus, an upper bound on the dimension complexity in terms of
the number of steps and size of the network in Open Question 1 for such an approximate version of
gradient descent would also imply an upper bound on the dimension complexity in terms of the SQ
complexity. This connection between SQ learnability and approximate SGD is also used in a recent
work of Karchmer and Malach (2025). Their work is motivated by understanding the power of
SGD on neural networks and aims to prove an upper bound on an approximate variant of dimension
complexity for SQ learnable classes. However the claimed upper bounds do not hold due to a flaw
in the proof (Karchmer and Malach, 2026).


4. Relaxations and Generalizations
Polynomial Instead of Linear. Even if a linear upper bound cannot be established, it would be
interesting to show any polynomial upper bound, dc(H) = poly(S, T ) or dc(H) = poly(m, 1/τ )—
or, conversely, to rule out such a bound.

Dependence on the Size of the Domain. Open Question 2 is stated for an arbitrary domain,
and without a dependence on the size of the domain. As discussed in Section 3, bounding SQ
learnability in terms of the dimension complexity (the converse of Open Question 2) using existing
approaches requires a dependence also on n = log |X |. It might therefore be reasonable to allow
such a dependence also in the bound in Open Question 2 and settle for dc(H) = poly(m, 1/τ, n).

Probabilistic Variants. The learning algorithms often rely crucially on randomization, for exam-
ple in the random initialization of the network or initial solution in the algorithm of Dunagan and
Vempala (2004). While we do not know of any counterexamples to the conjectured upper bounds
on the deterministic dimension complexity, it may be that such counterexamples exist solely due
to the deterministic nature of the dimension complexity. To address this we also formulate our
conjecture with two probabilistic variants of dimension complexity. The weakest relaxation is to
consider a distribution over mappings and allow a failure probability (e.g. Chornomaz et al., 2025).
Specifically we ask the same questions for 1/2-confident dimension complexity dc1/2 (H) in place
of dc(H) which we formally define below. For δ > 0, dcδ (H) is the smallest d for which there
exists a distribution P over embeddings φ : X → Rd such that for all distributions D over X and
all h⋆ ∈ H, it holds that Prφ∼P [inf w∈Rd LD,h⋆ (hw,φ ) = 0] ≥ 1 − δ, where hw,φ (x) := ⟨w, φ(x)⟩.
     A stronger relaxation is the probabilistic dimension complexity dcε (H) (Kamath et al., 2020)
which also allows approximate representation. Formally, dcε (H) is the smallest d for which there
exists a distribution P over embeddings φ : X → Rd such that for all distributions D over X and
all h⋆ ∈ H, it holds that Eφ∼P [inf w∈Rd LD,h⋆ (hw,φ )] ≤ ε. For this notion we ask whether (SGD
or SQ) learning to within error ε implies an upper bound on dcC·ε (H). We remark that this stronger
notion itself does not imply efficient learnability (or polynomial SQ complexity) due to approximate
representation. It still captures the approximation power of linear classifiers.

                                                 4
                       P OWER OF D EEP L EARNING OVER L INEAR M ODELS




References
Emmanuel Abbe and Colin Sandon. On the universality of deep learning. In Neural Informa-
 tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
 paper/2020/hash/e7e8f8e5982b3298c8addedf6811d500-Abstract.html.

Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix-Adserà, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. The staircase property: How
 hierarchical structure can guide deep learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems
 (NeurIPS), 2021a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/
 a45a1d12ee0fb7f1f872ab91da18f899-Abstract.html.

Emmanuel Abbe, Pritish Kamath, Eran Malach, Colin Sandon, and Nathan Srebro. On the power of
 differentiable learning versus PAC and SQ learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems
 (NeurIPS), pages 24340–24351, 2021b. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
 paper/2021/hash/cc225865b743ecc91c4743259813f604-Abstract.html.

Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix-Adserà, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. The merged-staircase property: A
 necessary and nearly sufficient condition for SGD learning of sparse functions on two-layer neural
 networks. In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), volume 178 of Proceedings of Machine
 Learning Research, pages 4782–4887. PMLR, 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
 press/v178/abbe22a.html.

Maria-Florina F Balcan and Vitaly Feldman. Statistical active learning algorithms. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 26, 2013.

Shai Ben-David, Nadav Eiron, and Hans Ulrich Simon. Limitations of learning via embeddings in
  euclidean half spaces. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 3:441–461, 2002. URL https://jmlr.org/
  papers/v3/bendavid02a.html.

Bogdan Chornomaz, Shay Moran, and Tom Waknine. On reductions and representations of learning
  problems in euclidean spaces. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
  Computing, pages 2043–2054, 2025.

Hung-Hsu Chou, Johannes Maly, and Holger Rauhut. More is less: Inducing sparsity via over-
  parameterization. Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 12(3):iaad012, 2023. doi:
  10.1093/imaiai/iaad012.

John Dunagan and Santosh Vempala. A simple polynomial-time rescaling algorithm for solving lin-
  ear programs. In Proceedings of the thirty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing,
  pages 315–320, 2004.

Vitaly Feldman. Evolvability from learning algorithms. In Proceedings of the fortieth annual ACM
  symposium on Theory of computing, pages 619–628, 2008.

Vitaly Feldman. Distribution-independent evolvability of linear threshold functions. In Proceed-
  ings of the 24th Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pages 253–272. JMLR Workshop and
  Conference Proceedings, 2011.

Vitaly Feldman. A general characterization of the statistical query complexity. In Conference on
  learning theory, pages 785–830. PMLR, 2017.

                                                5
                                   F ELDMAN K AMATH S REBRO




Vitaly Feldman, Cristobal Guzman, and Santosh Vempala. Statistical query algorithms for mean
  vector estimation and stochastic convex optimization. Mathematics of Operations Research, 46
  (3):912–945, 2021.

Alon Gonen, Sivan Sabato, and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Efficient active learning of halfspaces: An
  aggressive approach. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 14(79):2583–2615, 2013. URL
  http://jmlr.org/papers/v14/gonen13a.html.

Pritish Kamath, Omar Montasser, and Nathan Srebro. Approximate is good enough: Probabilistic
  variants of dimensional and margin complexity. In Conference on Learning Theory (COLT),
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 2236–2262. PMLR, 2020. URL http://
  proceedings.mlr.press/v125/kamath20b.html.

Ari Karchmer and Eran Malach. The power of random features and the limits of distribution-free
  gradient descent. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 267 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 29078–29097. PMLR, 13–19
  Jul 2025. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/karchmer25a.html.

Ari Karchmer and Eran Malach. Personal communication, 2026.

Michael Kearns. Efficient noise-tolerant learning from statistical queries. Journal of the ACM
 (JACM), 45(6):983–1006, 1998.

Eran Malach, Pritish Kamath, Emmanuel Abbe, and Nathan Srebro. Quantifying the benefit of using
  differentiable learning over tangent kernels. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 7379–7389. PMLR, 2021. URL
  http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/malach21a.html.

Marko Medvedev, Idan Attias, Elisabetta Cornacchia, Theodor Misiakiewicz, Gal Vardi, and Nathan
 Srebro. Positive distribution shift as a framework for understanding tractable learning. In Inter-
 national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
 2602.08907. To appear.

Blake Woodworth, Suriya Gunasekar, Jason D. Lee, Edward Moroshko, Pedro Savarese, Itay Golan,
  Daniel Soudry, and Nathan Srebro. Kernel and rich regimes in overparametrized models. In Con-
  ference on Learning Theory (COLT), Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 3635–
  3673. PMLR, 2020. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v125/woodworth20a.
  html.




                                                6
